Although proof of work is today known primarily for its function in blockchain consensus algorithms, its original function was in fact something quite different. The first major use of proof of work was Adam Back’s Hashcash, a protocol that tries to fight email spam by making spam emails more expensive to generate. Proof of stake is today similarly best known for its applications in blockchain consensus, and the theory is that because of the way modern proof of stake works – allowing users to put at stake large amounts of economic resources for security without, in the normal case, actually spending them – it could potentially be vastly more efficient. So this leads to an interesting question: can we apply these advantages to make a more efficient version of Hashcash using proof of stake as well?

Let us start by describing the problem. The basic principle behind Hashcash rests on the idea that email today tends to be split into two categories: desirable email (“ham”), which people spend a reasonably large amount of effort writing and which people derive high value from reading, and undesirable email (“spam”), which people normally spend a much smaller amount of effort per email writing and which people derive a negative amount of value from reading. Hence, the theory goes, by attaching a small mandatory cost to each email sent, the “ham” can get through with only slight additional burden, whereas “spam” would be made entirely unprofitable. This “cost” is paid in the form of electricity and computational effort which is used to solve a mathematical puzzle that can be quickly verified by the recipient’s client before showing the email to the recipient.

The problem with this approach is threefold. First, spammers may simply switch to a strategy of spending slightly more effort on each email (eg. spending five seconds of human labor per message to make it more likely to catch the reader’s attention or bypass spam filters), and the threshold of computational work that would be needed to actually stop the majority of spam would be quite large. Second, spammers are more professional and have better access to specialized computer hardware that can quickly and cheaply solve these computational puzzles, so a cost that might be five cents to the ordinary user might only be a tenth of a cent to a spammer. Third, as this now-famous checklist listing flaws in popular proposed solutions to email spam points out, it is considered highly desirable to have a system where “sending email should be free”.

So here is a proof-of-stake alternative. When you send an email, you do not need to compute an expensive computational puzzle; instead, send a transaction to the blockchain which creates a contract containing some amount of money as a security deposit. As part of the email, send a private key to the recipient, which the recipient can submit into the contract to destroy the deposit (or donate it to a standardized charity) if they want to. If the deposit is not destroyed for some number of days, it is refunded to the sender. Note that there would be no gain to the recipient in destroying the deposit – the only motivation to do so would be pure spite. As a result, we get an asymmetry: the average cost for normal people to send an email would be small, because the recipient would only click “Report Spam” in the rare case that they are malicious, but the average cost for spammers would be quite high indeed – and specialized hardware asymmetries would not help spammers one bit.

One could see deposits going as high as a dollar in size, and one can even adopt a graduated scheme: senders can send whatever deposits they want above some minimum, but the level of notification that the recipient sees would depend on the exact amount. If it’s $0.1, then it’s just an email in their mailbox. If it’s $1, then a few phone notifications. If it’s $500, then their phone would ring at maximum volume overriding all other settings – but the sender best be prepared to pay the price if the recipient deems the sender’s intrusion unjustified.

One can create more advanced versions of this scheme that do not require sending a transaction to create a new deposit for each email; one can imagine a scheme where the sender sends out many keys to destroy portions of the same security deposit, alongside signatures saying that those keys are valid, and recipients publish the signatures (but not the keys!) to a Whisper-like channel allowing them to quickly sample and make sure that a particular deposit is not “over-subscribed” with destruction keys (one precise mechanism for doing this is to only treat signatures containing an index from 1 to N as valid, and add a rule that states that two signatures with the same index can be submitted to destroy the entire deposit with 10% transferred to the submitter; hence, one can be fairly sure that at most N signatures for that deposit exist). This would reduce the transaction load to roughly something like one transaction per email sender per year. In any case, smart contracts offer near-infinite room for creativity in optimizing the details.